## How cookies are used by this site

This site does not directly store [HTTP
cookies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_cookie) on your computer and does
not track you in any way, however it does make use of some third party
services which may do so.

If you do not wish to be tracked, or don't want such cookies to be stored on
your computer, you can set your browser preferences accordingly, or you can
install a third party browser add-on that does the same thing.  You will need
to consult your browsers documentation on how to do that.

The sections below explain the third party services which are are used by this
site; these services may set HTTP cookies on your computer and may be able to
track you across the web.  You may wish to consult the cookie policies that
these sites have.

### Google Analytics

[Google Analytics](https://analytics.google.com) is used to obtain aggregate
information about how visitors use this site, such as the number of visitors
each day and the pages that were viewed and how many times they were viewed.
This information is used to determine what articles are useful and the
information is not sold to anyone.
  
Google Analytics only provides access to aggregate information and not to any
information that may uniquely identify visitors or track them as they visit
other web sites.  However, Google Analytics may have and use such information
themselves.

### Disqus

[Disqus](https://disqus.com) is used to provide comments for the articles on
this site.  Disqus may ask you to log in and they will probably track you
across any web site that uses Disqus for comments.  To the site maintainer,
Disqus only provides a moderation interface and some basic analytics
information.

### YouTube

[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com) is used to provide some video content which
is embedded into articles on this site.  YouTube will probably track you and
record what videos you have viewed.  To the video owner, YouTube provides some
aggregate analytics, such as the number of times a video has been viewed.
